Are you recording this time?
Were journalists' methods changed during the
60s?
Well, I don't think the basic methods changed any.
I can't recall that there were any revolutionary
kinds of changes. I think that... They may have
changed to the extent that there came to be less of a
reliance on official sources for things. I think
the kind of tension that grew up between
journalists and public officials, especially
the police and prosecutors and like that,
probably probably led them to deal with other
kinds of sources more. And I guess if that's a
change in method, then yeah, you could say that the
method changed. But beyond that, I can't think of
anything that was essentially a change. There
were, of course, parts of journalism that
developed during that time, the so-called
underground press and the and the so-called new
journalism sort of thing that relied more on
impressions and opinions and representations of
situations rather than attempts to factually
report situations, that kind of thing. But that
was outside mainstream journalism. I don't think
mainstream journalism changed much, except
perhaps in a relationship of journalists to their
sources. But there certainly was a development of
these other forms of journalism. They really
weren't new, of course. We've had that kind of
thing from time to time throughout our history.
But they certainly enjoyed a period of
development at that time. And some of the elements
in that journalism have since spilled over into
journalism today in terms of probably more of an
emphasis on explanation and interpretation.
That's kind of an evolutionary change, I think. I
guess, yes, there was change, and no, there
wasn't.
How prevalent were underground newspapers in
Austin? Well, there was one that was very
prevalent. It was called The Rag, which was
published out around in the University of Texas
neighborhood. And in the beginning, of course,
The Rag was typical of that kind of thing, in which
it went out of its way to try to shock the
establishment there. Their vocabularies were
pretty rich with four-letter words and they
extolled the virtues of sex and drugs and nudity
and anything that they calculated was going to
infuriate the establishment. That was their
style. As underground newspapers matured, they
got away from that kind of deliberately
outrageous shock value kind of thing and began to
deal more with issues and it really became
respectable. I guess the most clear example of
that is the Los Angeles Free Press which began much
in the way that I said and grew and remains an
alternative kind of a newspaper, but one that
certainly is not that far from the mainstream and
has become very successful.
I don't recall, around Austin, I don't recall that
there was any other than the RAG, but the RAG was
very widely distributed and widely read and
certainly was a prominent feature of the of the
University of Texas area at that time.
You were mentioning
less reliance on sources. What about
journalistic ethics? Were they affected during
this era? Well, I guess maybe they were in some
degree because
I think there was more of a willingness to use
unnamed sources to protect sources because I
think the feeling was that in order to get to the
inside of some of these dissident movements that
you had to deal with people on their terms. I think
that as time passed that
I guess we're getting really a little bit beyond
this period. But the Pentagon Papers business,
for example, was a willingness on the part of
highly responsible newspapers to use stolen
information. And so I think that presented an
ethical problem, and it's one that journalism is
still wrestling with. I think what happened was
that as journalists became less and less willing
to trust established sources, that is the
officials, elected officials, police
officials, that sort of thing, that they dropped
into a kind of a situational ethic in which in order
to get information that they were willing to
justify means according to the ends that were
being served. And so I think I think probably there
came to be a higher reliance on situational ethics
maybe during that period than there had been
before. And that generated what is a continuing
debate about that very kind of thing, about the use
of anonymous sources, about the use of stolen
information, about
reporters operating undercover sting
reporters, you know, journalistic sting
operations, things like that. Those are still hot
topics in journalism, and I think they were really
generated beginning with this period we're
talking about.
How much did public and government distrust of
media grow in this area? public and government
distrust of the media.
I think it did grow. And the reason I think that it
grew is because the media were dealing with lots of
subjects that the public really didn't want to
acknowledge. I think public
did not want to come to grips with the fact that the
dissidents the hippies or whatever the term were
that were being used for these people might have a
point that they were human beings who were
indulging in a different lifestyle all right i
think that there was a feeling among a lot of people
that the media were in effect promoting these
disident causes, I think they sometimes felt that
the media were promoting the use of marijuana and
other drugs.
I think that a feeling grew that because the media
were covering these topics, that that
automatically meant that the media favored these
kinds of people and these kinds of lifestyles and
that the media therefore were
anti-establishment. Now, the truth of the matter
is that if you read the editorial columns of that
time, you're going to find that the mass media were
about as conservative as ever. But in the news
columns, I think quite a different kind of an
impression might be gained. And especially as the
media began to be critical of the Vietnam War, as
the war grew on and there got to be a realization
that that information was being jiggled around
pretty significantly by the government and lots
of lies were being told. And so I think that public
and officialdom began to distrust the media sort
of lumping the messenger in with the people where
the messages came from that they didn't like. So
yeah, I think distrust did grow during that
period. I think the public doesn't distinguish a
lot between editorial policies on the editorial
page and news coverage. And I'm not sure that they
distinguish very clearly Maybe they don't really
differentiate as much as they should the
difference between, say, the Los Angeles Free
Press and the Los Angeles Times. They just sort of
lump them all in there. And then television
exacerbated that quite a bit, I think, because
television, especially for the first time, very
first time in our history, began to see pictures of
a war that were unflattering to Americans. Always
in the past, We had covered wars in a way that were
unflattering to the other guy, but they didn't
show that anything that was unflattering. Our
people were always heroes, their people were
always fiends. Well, in Vietnam, it didn't come
out that way. It turned out maybe everybody was a
fiend. It was a very confusing kind of war. And we
had the things like the My Lai Massacre and all that
kind of stuff. And so people had a high level of
dissonance about all that. They didn't want to
deal with it. It seemed that the media were going
out of their way to portray a negative image of the
United States and the United States Armed Forces
and the United States purposes in Vietnam. And so I
think that really, probably even more in print,
increased the distrust of the public in
officialdom. And that was during that time, of
course, that people like Spiro Agnew were making
speeches in which they were talking about the
eastern liberal establishment and about how
Walter Cronkite could raise an eyebrow and
control the opinions of the nation and all that
kind of thing. Television especially became a
very easy scapegoat for the people who were trying
to explain away all the social unrest and all the
dissatisfaction with the Vietnam War and all that
sort of thing. So, yep, the distrust certainly
increased.
Looking back, how extensive were the changes on
the media?
And did they affect the small town papers, medium
papers, and the large papers equally, or in what
proportion? Well, I think the things that have
really affected the way mass media operate have
been the recent technological changes. And those
really were not in effect at that time. although
some of the smaller papers already were beginning
to switch to offset printing and that sort of
thing. So there's a change in that regard. But I
can't say beyond the kinds of things I've already
talked about in terms of the relationship between
the media and their sources and their audiences. I
can't think of any special changes in operations
or in techniques or anything like that that were
especially different. Maybe my mind is only
blank, but I really can't. It seems to me that
significant changes have come about since that
time in terms of development of cable television
and satellite transmissions and television
super stations in terms of really rapid
development of printing techniques and
electronic newsroom technologies and things
like that. That's all happened since the period
we're talking about.
Well, thank you very much. You're welcome.